Now that I have my robot and a coordinate
frame, I can measure the position of the robot
with respect to the coordinate frame. So,
with my tape measure, I can see that the robot
has got an x coordinate of 18 centimetres
and it has got a y coordinate of 16 centimetres.
So I can describe the position of the robot
in terms of a vector and the elements of the
vector are 18 and 16 in units of centimetres.
Now, I can introduce other objects in the
environment. A robot can have a little friend.
His little friend can sit over there, and
I can measure the position of the little friend
as well. And, he is sitting at about 38 centimetres
in the x direction, that’s his x coordinate.
And, the y coordinate, not so easy to measure,
but I could say perhaps it’s 6 centimetres
in the y direction. So, any object within
this environment I can describe their position
in terms of two coordinates with respect to
the coordinate frame that I laid down at the
beginning.
Describing the position of the robot is an
important part of the problem, but it’s
not quite enough. We need to be able to say
something about which way this robot is facing.
So, if this robot wanted to move towards this
robot, we need to know whether it’s going
to move forwards, to the left, to the right,
backwards. So, this robot is very different
to this robot, to this robot, to this robot.
It’s important to be able to describe which
way it’s facing. And, in order to describe
which way it’s facing, we can use the tools
that we've already been discussing. And, what
we can do is we can attach another coordinate
frame to our robot. In this case, I’m going
to use a green coordinate frame and I’m
going to stick it on to the bottom of the
robot with some, with some blue tack. Now
with the robots here, we can describe its
orientation - the way it’s facing in the
world - by the orientation of this coordinate
frame with respect to this coordinate frame.
So, we can describe then the position of this
new coordinate frame that we've attached to
the robot in terms of a motion. We do a motion
from the original coordinate frame, our reference
coordinate frame, sometimes called the world
coordinate frame, that we move the origin
of this frame to here and then we rotate.
We can do the same thing for the little robot.
We can describe its pose with respect to the
world coordinate frame. To do that, I’m
going to attach a blue coordinate frame to
this little robot, and, I’m going to orient
it so that the x-axis is pointing forward.
And this is a pretty common convention for
airplane, ships, cars, robots. We make the
x-axis the direction of normal motion for the machine.
Now, we have a very simple representation
of the original environment where it’s described
now entirely in terms of a number of coordinate
frames which represent the pose of the important
entities in that environment with respect
to the world coordinate frame. Now, just as
we did for the big robot, we can consider
the pose of the little robot in terms of a
motion. So, imagine that we move the coordinate
frame from where it lies on top of the reference
coordinate frame. We make a translational
motion, move it horizontally, we move it vertically,
and then we rotate it and rotate it quite
a bit until it lies on top of that coordinate
frame. So, that is the pose of the little
robot with respect to the world coordinate
frame described in terms of a positional component
and a rotational component.
So, now we have described the pose of the
little robot with respect to the world coordinate
frame. We previously described the pose of
the big robot with respect to the world coordinate
frame. But, we can also describe the pose
of the little robot with respect to the big
robot, and we can do that by picking up the
big robot’s coordinate frame and we make
a translation in the world x direction, and
then in the world y direction, and then we
rotate it until the axis line up. And, that
then is a relative motion or relative pose
from this coordinate frame to this one.
I’m going to use this Greek letter which
is pronounced as ksi to represent pose. In
a two-dimensional world, pose has got three
parameters: x and y which represent the offset
from the origin of one coordinate frame to
the origin of the next coordinate frame, and
the angle Theta which represents the rotation
from one coordinate frame to the next. There
is an important convention when we talk about
the rotation of one coordinate frame with
respect to another, and that is that angles
increase positively in the anticlockwise direction.
So, if this is my original coordinate frame,
if I rotate that by the angle Theta, it looks
like this. Importantly, positive rotation
is in the anticlockwise direction.
We can also think about pose as a move, a
motion in the x direction and in the y direction,
and then a rotation or twist by the amount Theta.
So, we can describe that the position of this
new coordinate frame that we have attached
to the robot in terms of a motion. We do a
motion from the original coordinate frame,
our reference coordinate frame, sometimes
called the world coordinate frame, that we
move the origin of this frame to here, and
then we rotate.
So, let’s summarise what we've covered in
this section. A point can be described by
a vector with respect to a particular coordinate
frame, and, when we do that, we introduce
some additional notation. We use the symbol
lower case p to represent a vector. The A
in front denotes the coordinate frame from
which the vector starts. So, this vector begins
from the origin of coordinate frame A. The
trailing B is the destination. It’s the
name of the point that the vector points to.
The pose of a coordinate frame can be described
with respect to another coordinate frame.
I used this fat arrow to represent the pose
- the motion from coordinate frame A to coordinate
frame B. Now, the motion is more complex than
just a translation like an ordinary vector.
It includes a translation and a rotation,
so that’s why I used a different kind of
arrow. You know that it’s fatter and it’s
got a different kind of head.
Symbolically, I describe it like this. I use
the Greek letter ksi to denote that we’re
talking about a pose. The leading A is the
frame of reference. That’s where I start
from. The trailing B is where I want to end
up. This symbol describes a relative motion,
a relative pose from the coordinate frame
A to the coordinate frame B. We can consider
a pose as a motion. We can consider it as
a translation and a rotation. And, for the
two-dimensional case, the pose is described
by three numbers: two translational components
and one rotational component.